Okay, Python.
Does everyone here know what Python is?
Python is one of the
old scripting languages,
but it's very cool.
It's dynamically typed,
just like Objective-C is,
except it's entirely done at runtime.
It's a powerful high-level language,
so high-level that it often is
identical to this pseudocode.
integrates extremely
well with Objective-C,
so well that PyObjC applications
are completely indistinguishable
from their Objective-C counterparts,
even to Interface Builder.
You can use it to quickly develop,
extend,
and test applications for Mac OS X.
Because it's so dynamic,
you can change things at runtime.
In this session,
you'll learn why you should use Python,
where you can find it on Mac OS X,
Python syntax for
Objective-C programmers,
Cocoa applications in Python,
mixed Python Objective-C applications,
and writing plugins entirely in Python.
Why Python?
Python saves you time.
Python is interpretive, interactive,
object-oriented.
The syntax is very powerful,
but also very clear.
It's got excellent support
for data structures:
dictionaries, lists, sets, everything.
It's all there.
It's dynamically typed,
and it's garbage collected.
You don't have to wait
for Objective-C to get it.
You can have it now.
Python on Mac OS X has unparalleled
integration with Objective-C.
The bridge actually works.
is already used in real
shrink-wrapped applications,
and it's cross-platform
when you want it to be,
even with this Intel stuff.
Less code.
Since Python syntax is so powerful,
and it does a whole
lot of things for you,
you'll have shorter development cycles,
fewer bugs, better tests,
and more features.
A lot of people, even if they have
Objective-C applications,
are now writing their tests in Python,
because it's so much clearer.
Where is it?
Python ships with Mac OS X.
Mac OS 10.4 comes with
Python 2.3.5 as a framework build
in system library frameworks.
It comes with WXPython, TkEnter,
it comes with an Apple proprietary
core graphics extension,
but it's missing some
useful things like BSDDB,
the Berkeley DB wrapper, and Readline,
because that's got that
GPL thing going on.
The current Python version
is not Python 2.3.5.
The current Python is 2.4.1.
Python 2.4 has a lot
of cool new features,
decorators, built-in set type,
and a lot of good things
that you probably want.
So,
if you want to get the latest Python 2.4,
you can get the installer
from Python.org,
and this is also a framework build,
just like the Apple one,
except it's the latest,
least amount of bugs, etc., etc.
This one comes with a working TK-Enter,
but it also comes with a working
BSTDB and a working readline.
So, if you press up in the
command interpreter,
you'll get the last command
and not some ASCII garbage.
You can, of course,
install the readline extension
for the Apple Python,
and that's available at
pythonmac.org/packages.
We'll get to that later.
So, you can use this Python 2.4 to
create Mac OS 10.3 compatible apps.
Currently, Python does not have good
integration with the SDKs,
so in order to build X.3
compatible apps on X.4,
you need to build everything on X.3.
You can assemble your application on X.4,
but all of its constituent
components that include compiled
stuff needs to be compiled on X.3.
Fortunately,
I've done a lot of that for you guys,
and I have a wealth of extensions
on pythonmac.org/packages,
and also the Python 2.4.1
build is available,
and that's built on X.3.
This one gets installed into the user,
not the user location,
the system location for administrators
in library frameworks Python,
and a couple of sim
links to the internet.
interpreter and use your local bin.
[Transcript missing]
Python data structures.
Here's where I get into all
the Objective-C Python stuff.
Python data structures are a
lot like the data structures
you'll find in Foundation.
You've got the list,
which is a mutable type
that's not hashable.
The list syntax is square brackets
and commas between the elements.
So it's just like C array,
but it's a lot more convenient to
do than the NSMutable array version,
as you can see.
The list has quite a few methods, append,
etc.
They're not named the same
as the Objective-C ones.
They're often more terse.
But it's equivalent.
The tuple is the immutable version.
It's hashable only if its contents are,
and it's just like a normal NSArray.
The syntax for a tuple is the comma.
The parentheses are only used
for clarity and unambiguity,
but really, the operator to create
a tuple is the comma.
So if you want a tuple with one element,
you still need that comma.
So typically,
if you have a tuple with one element,
it's going to be:
. That confuses a lot of people early on,
but you get used to it.
The dictionary in Python is
one of the types that the
language is basically based on.
All objects have a dictionary for its
instance variables and its methods,
and classes have the same.
The namespace for modules,
it's all based on dictionaries.
Therefore, the Python dictionary
implementation is very,
very fast.
And it's very good and easy to use.
It's a mutable type, not hashable,
and unlike the NSMutable
dictionary and NSDictionary,
it does not copy its keys.
So the keys in a Python dictionary
must be hashable.
So that can cause you some
slight issues if you're bridging
Python and Objective-C code,
if you pass Python dicks around,
because those Python dicks
are not going to copy the keys
of your Objective-C stuff.
However,
since we do bridge the mutable string
as a Python hashable immutable string,
it's not often a problem.
The Unicode object in Python is
what you use to store text.
Unfortunately,
it's not the only thing that
can be used to store text.
The Unicode object stores characters,
not bytes.
To denote a Unicode object,
it's a string literal
with a "u" in front of it.
The Unicode object syntax supports
quite a few different ways to escape it.
You've got the hexadecimal escape,
you've got the Unicode
hexadecimal escape,
and then you've got the nice
named Unicode literal syntax,
which makes it really obvious which
character you're putting in there,
because you have to name it out.
The string type in Python,
unfortunately named,
is an immutable type that stores bytes.
But these bytes can act like characters.
Hopefully this is due
to just legacy reasons,
because Python prior to 1.6 did not
have any Unicode support at all.
So they had this bytes type,
which is only really
good for doing English,
because the encoding is
completely ambiguous.
So you want to avoid this
if you're representing text,
unless it's just some sort of
literal in your source code,
like the name of a method
or something like that.
Because still those are
based on the str type,
so you can't have a method
named the copyright character.
It still has to be regular strings.
These are equivalent to
initializing an enterprise.
So you can't have an
NSString with a C string,
but they're also equivalent to an NSData.
It really depends on how you use it.
So if you're bridging data
types over to Objective-C,
you can't just use the str type.
You'll have to wrap that in a buffer.
When we bridge these stereotypes,
we bridge them as the
default foundation encoding,
which can be whatever.
But typically, as defined in the
documentation right now,
the default is Mac Roman.
Python numbers.
Integers and floats are a mutable type.
The extent of a
Python integer is a C-long.
The Python float is a C-double.
The syntax for using these
is just the obvious syntax.
You write the number down.
If you add floats and ints together,
that works.
If you divide an integer by an integer,
you don't get a float yet,
but you will soon.
If you want that behavior now,
you can do from future import division.
If you want the integer behavior back,
you simply use the
double division operator,
the // which is integer division.
The bool type in
Python is just an integer,
except there's two singletons of it,
true and false,
that have a nice representation
if you print it out.
And the long type in Python is
an immutable number type.
It has no C equivalent because
it has infinite extent.
You can use this to represent
really large numbers,
as large as you want to.
There's no limit to it other than the
memory that you have and your patience.
To denote a long number,
you simply put a big fat L on the end,
and then it's long.
Python will automatically promote
numbers to longs if they get big enough.
Well, integers anyway.
But that behavior is relatively recent.
But Mac OS 10.4 ships
with a recent Python.
The NUN type is a mutable singleton
which is used like the NSNULL,
but other times it's
used like nil or null,
though it won't receive messages
like it does in Objective-C.
The NUN is just used as a placeholder,
like void, it denotes nothing there.
Okay, Python syntax.
Python syntax is a little foreign because
it doesn't use those squiggly braces
for anything but dictionary syntax.
Okay, and you're going to use
indentation instead of braces.
Colons and indentation denote blocks.
So you put a colon there,
and then you indent,
and that's your block.
It's equivalent to your curly braces,
except you type a little less.
Because in other languages,
you're going to be doing
the indentation anyway,
so it saves you the trouble.
It also makes it nice and easy to read,
because you don't have those
extra characters flannel around,
and if the indentation is wrong,
your program simply won't run.
So, if it looks good,
it probably works good too.
Python variables.
There's no type declaration,
and everything is an object,
even those integers and
none and everything else.
There's no value types,
everything is an object,
everything is done by reference.
It's just like everything
was an id and Objective-C.
That's how you would do it in Python.
Functions are first-class objects.
That means that you
can pass them anywhere.
You don't have to pass these silly
invocation objects around that bind an
object and a selector and all that stuff.
You simply just pass the
reference to the function.
This means that Python functions
are instance variables because
they're just first-class objects,
so there was no reason to have separate
namespaces for methods and IVARs.
So that's another thing that you
have to take note of if you're
bridging Python and Objective-C,
is that Python does not have a
separate namespace for selectors,
so you're not going to be writing
these accessors that have the
same IVAR name as the method name.
So what you do in Python is
you have these cool first-class
objects called descriptors,
which can basically return something
else if you get them off of an object.
So you have the convenience
of the getItem syntax,
like object.property,
but you have the power
of using an accessor.
So it's effectively like any
attribute reference in Python can
be a key-value coding path.
And Python functions take
positional and/or keyword arguments.
Positional arguments are like
what you have in Objective-C or C.
The arguments have to
be all there in a row.
You also have keyword arguments,
which are similar in
concept to selectors,
except they can be given in
any order like a dictionary,
which also means we can't use
that as the syntax for the bridge,
because the order is arbitrary,
since it's however it
ends up being hashed.
To denote positional
arguments of variable length,
you can just put a
star in front of there.
You don't have to do dot dot
dot and grab things off of this
crazy built-in compiler local,
any of that stuff.
Classes in Python.
The classes in Python have
their interface and
implementation as the same thing.
You don't have to write your class twice.
Methods are instance variables,
and in every method you define
the self variable explicitly.
This is because methods
are just functions.
They just happen to be living
on classes at the time.
So,
it's very explicit as to what happens.
There's nothing magical involved.
It's just the first argument is self.
Iteration in Python is very nice.
You have all of these iteration
concepts bundled into one thing:
the iterator protocol.
The iterator protocol are these
objects that have a next method,
and the next method returns the
next object that's expected.
So rather than having a couple
different ways to write loops,
for loops and while loops,
to iterate over something,
you just have one.
And the syntax for that
is for item in iterable.
So if you're going to do
a for loop with numbers,
like for zero, end here, step this way,
you'll just use a range
object or an x range object,
which is basically the
same as the C syntax.
The range object takes a length, a start,
and a stop,
just like the C iteration syntax does.
But the other cool thing is
these same for loops can be
used to iterate over anything.
You can iterate over lists,
you can iterate over dictionary keys,
you can iterate over iterable objects.
And you can build these
iterable objects yourself.
You can iterate over generators,
which are very cool Python objects.
If you define a function and you
write the word yield in there,
the statement yield,
and you do that several times,
and when you call it,
you get this generator object.
And then every time you iterate over that
generator object by calling its next,
implicitly or explicitly,
implicitly with the syntax like this,
it'll return the next
value that you yielded.
So you can use this to build
something like coroutines with a
little more safety than you'll get
if you do it in C with set jump,
long jump, and all that craziness.
Getting items out of dictionaries and
lists in Python uses the same syntax.
It's just the square bracket syntax.
So you get the first item out of a list
with list . Last item out of a list,
you can do -1,
or you can get the length of the list -1.
The syntax for dictionaries is the same.
You just put the key inside
of the square brackets.
In Objective-C,
you have the methods obj.inx and
valueForKey and all that stuff.
But in Python, it's the same concept,
and you do it the same way.
Unlike JavaScript,
the arrays and dictionaries
are actually different types.
So you don't have lists
with holes in them,
because you don't have nice syntax.
The lists are the same.
Slicing is available for lists
and anything that wants to
implement the slicing protocol.
Slicing is basically unlike anything
you've ever seen anywhere else,
unless you've used very
esoteric languages.
Slicing is an extension
to this getitem syntax,
where you can specify the start, stop,
and step of what you want.
So if you want every item
but the first element,
you can say one colon.
That means you start at the first item,
not the zero, the first index,
and then you go until the
end with a step of one.
If you want the first two or less items,
you do the same thing,
except you put colon two,
which means start at the
beginning and end at two.
If you want the list backwards,
you can do ::-1,
which means start at the beginning,
end at the end, at a step of -1.
And if you just want a
quick way to copy a list,
a shallow copy, you can just do a colon
in the getitem syntax,
and that'll start at the beginning,
end at the end, and iterate by 1.
So you'll get a shallow
copy of the entire list with
a three-character syntax.
In Objective-C,
you'd have to imagine how you
would write all these things,
and I guarantee it would not be pretty.
Modules in Python.
Unlike Objective-C,
the Python namespace is not flat.
That's another thing you'll have to
take note of when you're bridging.
Python modules are namespaces for stuff.
One module corresponds to one file.
But unlike many other languages,
these modules are executed
at the same time that all
their symbols are parsed out.
So if you do a circular import
where you have interdependencies
between these two modules,
then it simply just won't work.
You can't define two classes in one
module and two classes in another
module with interdependencies
on each other at the module
level of code and have it work.
It just doesn't do that.
And Python namespaces,
using Python namespaces are explicit.
To bring a namespace into your namespace,
you simply type import and
then the name of that module.
And to use functions and methods and
all that stuff from that namespace,
you just use the getitem syntax,
object.property.
Okay, you can also bring specific items
from another namespace into your
namespace with the from import syntax.
From another module,
import another function.
There's an extension to
this where you can say,
from another module, import star,
which is just generally frowned upon
because it kind of makes it hard to tell
where symbols came from in your module,
but it gets you the same feel
that you have in C or Objective-C,
where if you do an import statement,
you get everything.
And this is awfully convenient
if you're doing bridged code,
because you can simply import from
an Objective-C framework wrapper,
and you'll get all the symbols,
and it's just like
doing it in Objective-C.
PyObjC is a great, awesome,
magical bridge that makes
Python and Cocoa work together.
Unlike the other bridges,
where you have all
these crazy edge cases,
PyObjC bridge does
everything pretty much right.
The bridge lets you use
Objective-C from Python,
and it lets you use
Python from Objective-C,
and there's no glue required.
You don't have to
code-generate little things,
and you don't have to
read other documentation.
It simply just works,
and it's done in a very consistent way,
so you don't have to
go crazy learning it.
The selectors bridged from
Objective-C to Python,
you need to deinterleave the
arguments from the selector,
which basically means replacing the
colons in the selector with underscores.
This is done because Python uses
colons for something else.
You can't use a colon in a method name,
because that would mean you're
trying to start a block or
something crazy like that.
And also,
because Python's keyword syntax can't
be used since the keys are not ordered,
you have to do it similar to
the Java and JavaScript bridges.
And basically every language
bridge worth its salt does this,
because other languages
simply can't denote that
Objective-C syntax in a clear way.
So it's different, but it's equivalent.
And the thing is here is that you really
do replace colons with underscores,
even if it only takes one argument.
So if you have...
So, if you want to say append object,
it's going to be append
object underscore,
parenthesis, and then the object
you're going to append.
Subclassing Objective-C classes from
Python works just as you'd expect it to.
You subclass the object with
the normal class syntax.
What this does here is that it has to
follow the same rules as Objective-C,
which means that no matter
what module it's done in,
you can only have one class of that name
if it has an Objective-C superclass.
So that's another thing
you have to be wary of.
However, this gives you a full class
bridge to Objective-C,
so if you want to find that
class from Objective-C,
you can use NSClass from String
and the name of the class.
As long as that Python code has been run,
you'll be able to find it.
And you can even do it from the
NSBundle syntax if you happen to be
loading Python stuff from a bundle.
In PyObjC,
rather than just bridging method calls,
we also bridge lots of other things too
to make it really convenient to use.
You have the NSString type and
chair pointers are bridged to
the Python Unicode and str types.
And this bridge is bidirectional,
so you can take a Python string literal,
pass it over the bridge through
a method call or in a collection
or something like that,
and it will be bridged right
over to an NSString subclass.
And if the Objective-C selector
says that it takes a chair pointer,
then the str type will
be bridged right over,
no problem.
The data types in Objective-C are
bridged a little strangely,
because in Python you'd kind of expect
a data type to be bridged as a str,
but we can't do that and also
bridge text types correctly.
So what we do here is we bridge
data types as a buffer-like
object and vice versa.
So if you get an NSData from Objective-C,
you'll have an object that
implements the buffer protocol.
And that lets you do cool things
like use it to initialize an array
object or like a numeric array or a
pill buffer or something like that.
And if you want to pass a
data over to Objective-C,
rather than having to initialize NSData,
data with bytes, and a Python string,
you can simply wrap it with
the Python buffer object,
which saves you a copy if nothing else.
The array types are
bridged to list and tuple.
Since the implementation of
NSArray doesn't really specify
if it's going to be a mutable
array or an immutable array,
they're all bridged as list types,
so you can't check to see
if it's instance tuple to
see if it's mutable or not.
You really just have to try it
and see if it lets you mutate it.
The dictionary types are bridged to dict,
but there is that caveat
of not copying keys at all.
The number types, NSNumber,
are bridged to dict.
and also the C value types, bool, int,
float, double, all that stuff,
are bridged to the
Python types equivalently,
int, long, float, etc.
However,
if you get one of these NSNumbers,
these NSNumbers don't really
correctly describe themselves as
to what number they actually are.
Currently in the foundation,
if you initialize an
NSNumber with an unsigned integer,
and you ask it what type it is,
it'll tell you what signed type it is.
And so that gives you some
strange behavior if you bridge
it right over to Python.
But what we do is we bridge the
NSNumbers over to subclasses of int,
long, and float.
And what that does is it gives you the
same methods that you had on NSNumbers.
So if you get one of these
things over the bridge,
you can call its float value or
unsigned int value or whatever,
and you'd get the same behavior
that you'd get in Objective-C,
meaning that if you
call the right method,
you get the right value,
and everything works correctly.
But if you don't, and you just use it as
a regular Python object,
it supports all the number stuff,
but it might give you the wrong value
if it's supposed to be unsigned.
You've got these NSDecimal numbers
in Foundation that are bridged
to a custom number-like wrapper.
In Python 2.4, we could have bridged it
to the decimal object,
but the decimal object has
very precise semantics,
especially if you'd ask
somebody like Tim Peters.
And we decided to have a separate wrapper
rather than trying to bridge it to
something semantically non-equivalent.
And also, for some of the Carbon types,
like FSRef objects,
those are bridged right
over to the Python type,
rather than getting this
ugly little struct thing.
You'll get an FSRef object in Python,
and that supports the normal FSRef
methods and whatnot that you have.
Wrapped frameworks.
Frameworks in Objective-C are
wrapped as Python packages.
So that means if you have the
AppKit framework and you want
to get symbols out of it,
you can do from AppKit import *.
But this only works because we
made special wrappers for them.
You can't do that for anything.
You can't do from Omni
Foundation import *,
because there isn't a
package already for that.
But there are packages for
everything that ships with this
system that we've wrapped so far,
which is basically all
of the useful ones:
AppKit, Foundation, CoreData,
etc., etc., etc.
If you want to get the frameworks
that we haven't wrapped yet,
we have the NSBundle API,
which you can use to do it
the same way you would load
it dynamically in Objective-C.
Or you can use our API,
the objc.loadbundle,
loadbundle variables,
loadbundle functions,
that let you pick stuff out of the
bundle and import it into a namespace,
which gets you all the symbols
at once rather than having to
NSClass from string them all.
There's also ways to generate
Python packages from frameworks.
However, we haven't quite released
something that we like a lot yet.
So that's not quite a public API,
but it's going to be as soon as
we get our Objective-C header
parser and all that jazz to
work as well as we'd like it to.
We also have Xcode templates.
A lot of you like Xcode,
and everyone should be using Xcode,
especially now.
But it's not the greatest thing
in the world for Python yet.
Xcode doesn't have a lot
of Python support built in.
And in Xcode 2.0 at least,
the target support didn't let us
do what we needed to do natively,
so we had to add a little magic
with some shell scripts and some
Xcode file parsing and stuff.
So the Xcode templates work,
and they do the right thing,
but they might be a little fragile.
However, if it breaks, we'll fix it.
The magic that we used here is
that we made development and
deployment different targets.
And we used py2app to build instead
of asking Xcode to do anything.
The build step is simply a shell
script that runs a setup py,
just like you would build
any other Python application.
And that py2app script will
read the Xcode project file,
look in your groups,
pick out the Python files,
pick out the resources,
and instruct py2app to
build the application.
And a future version of Xcode,
possibly even Xcode 2.1,
will be able to rework these
templates to be cleaner.
What py2app does is a lot
of very nice things for you.
It'll take care of all
your Python dependencies.
It looks at your Python files
and your scripts,
it analyzes the bytecode,
and looks for import statements.
And then it looks through your
Python module namespace to find all
those dependencies that you have.
And it makes all that
stuff go into your bundle.
So you don't have to
figure out what you use,
it'll figure it out for you.
It's not 100% reliable,
but the only thing you have to do to
fix it is put an import statement in
your code if it doesn't find something.
However, it is quite reliable as long as
you're using import statements
and not the special underscore,
underscore, and so on.
So you can use the import
statement in Python to import
something with a dynamic name.
It also automatically finds all
dependent frameworks and and dial-ups.
So if you have this Python extension
that links to something
crazy that's third-party,
it'll actually find that you do that,
and it'll copy it in,
and it'll rewrite the load commands.
So no install name tool,
no copy files phases,
it does all that for you automatically.
And it gives you the bundle
relative install names,
so you don't have to have
these crazy set-em dial-ed
scripts or any mess like that.
It just does it all for you,
hopefully correctly.
Some of this technology that's
in here can actually be used
for regular Objective-C projects
or any other language,
basically.
There's a shell script that you
can just run on your application,
and it'll make it standalone by doing
this whole dial-ed find process.
And I actually used that, heretically,
possibly,
to build the Frozen Bubble application,
which depends on Perl and a bunch
of stuff from Darwin ports and SDL.
And it just worked.
So cool stuff in PyDA app,
and you should look into it,
even if you're not
doing Python stuff yet.
Because it can save you all
the trouble of doing the copy
files phases and all that stuff.
And the tool that it ships with to
do that is called mako_standalone.
All right, excuse me.
So,
some demos of all the stuff in action.
And as Bob says, I mean, you know,
we're going to do a lot
of PyOpc related demos,
but Python and Mac OS X with
PyOpc installed,
the Py2App stuff is just brilliant.
It lets you package up any
standard Python modules,
a double clickable dot package.
So, if you're distributing standard
portable Python across a fleet of Macs,
packaging and installation
is now trivial.
Oh, yay.
I still have bits.
Excellent.
So,
this application that's running on the
screen now is actually the outline edit
example from the core data examples
that are provided on your machine,
ported to Python and PyOpc.
As you can see, it all just works.
And what's interesting about this
is just works means KVO works,
key value observation, key value coding,
subclassing, delegation, nib loading,
the entire Cocoa stack.
Now, what does this look
like under the covers?
So, I'm going to go ahead and quit this.
And where did I put it?
Okay.
Desktop.
See the examples.
Okay.
Data.
As you can see, PyObjC has a boatload
of examples with it.
We go now outline edit.
The actual app wrapper looks
like a standard app wrapper,
but because of the magic of py2app,
everything, all the dependencies,
dialyps, everything's wrapped up inside.
Let me go ahead and open up my document.
This is actual Python code
written against Cocoa.
In particular, you'll see this.
This is interesting.
This demonstrates the dynamism of
Objective-C in combination with
a scripted language like Python.
In this case,
this is the document class for
the outline edit application.
How many Cocoa programmers are here?
Okay, so the standard Cocoa paragraph.
What this is actually doing is reading
the definition of the document,
my document class from the nib file,
defining the subclass on the fly,
and setting it all up,
and then instantiating it
from within the nib file.
You can also see, you know, there's,
this is straight
Objective-C more or less,
calling methods, etc.
It all really does just work.
What's our-- can we go back
to slides for a second?
What's the next one?
The next demo is PyObjc
Mixed Applications.
This demo is a cool little
application called RestEdit.
RestEdit is a text editing application
for editing a special kind of
text called restructured text.
Restructured text is a text
format that's kind of like
Markdown if you've ever used it,
but it's used for basically
writing Python documentation
and various other documents.
It can be translated to LaTeX and
HTML and all kinds of cool stuff.
Can we get the demo machine, please?
So it's unfortunate the
font's a little small,
but on the left-hand pane there,
you'll see that this is a text document
with some pretty minor ASCII markup,
but on the right side is
the rendered form of it.
Now again, this is actually a mixed
Python and Objective-C application,
so like the split view here was
an open source split view that
I found that was really useful.
There's kernel queues being used in here.
There's several other things
happening from Objective-C that
is integrated with Python,
and then is also using a number
of third-party Python modules.
And one of those third-party
Python modules is
for the second one.
PyObjC survived the upgrades too,
by the way.
I think it's still reading
the old Xcode project,
though.
So... Well, yeah,
but we can gloss over that
for the next hour or so.
Okay, so what we have here is the Xcode
project for restructured text.
This isn't the one that's used in the
release version of restructured text,
but I refactored it to use
the new Xcode templates.
The new Xcode templates, as I said,
you have separate development
and deployment targets that
build the application in
development or deployment mode.
The cool thing about py2app's
development mode is that it
doesn't really compile anything.
Basically, it just makes symlinks
to your source code,
and it runs it straight out of the tree.
So you can just make a
change to the source,
and then restart your application.
It takes like two seconds
to start your application,
rather than however long it would
take you to recompile everything,
or recompile just the unit,
or what have you.
When you switch to deployment,
it'll do all that crazy stuff
that I talked about before.
All the dependency finding,
the framework finding,
the header rewriting, all that stuff.
And what I didn't mention
before is that when you build a
standalone deployment application,
it really is standalone.
If you're using a third-party Python,
like Python 2.4.1,
it'll include Python itself.
It'll include PyObjective-C.
It'll include everything you use.
And you don't really
have to think about it,
because it does it all for you.
And the way this Xcode template
works is it has special groups,
and these groups do different
slightly magical things.
The resources group are the resources
that end up in your application.
So all your nibs, all that stuff,
just throw in the resources folder
and it'll end up in your application.
The classes thing,
what it does is it'll actually import
all these classes in the order that
they are listed in the Xcode project.
So if your nib depends on something,
you don't have to worry about
importing it somewhere in the code.
You just put it in this
group and it'll be imported.
And this is the mixed template.
So what we have here is another target,
which is all the Objective-C stuff.
And all this Objective-C stuff is
compiled as Xcode normally compiles it.
Takes all this RB split view stuff,
the KQ wrapper, and it puts it all into
a nice little plugin,
and that plugin ends up
in the resources folder.
What we have here is this automatically
generated Python script that
uses the objc load bundle API.
and it picks up the bundle and
it imports all the classes.
And this gets imported automatically,
so basically you have this mixed target,
you write some Objective-C code,
you write some Python code,
and you don't write any glue
code because this is it,
and this is automatically
generated for you.
And to use it from your Python code,
Okay, to use it from your Python code,
you simply import it and...
There it is.
That's the Objective-C code
in the project.
We're using the KQ wrapper.
The split view stuff,
we're not even using in the code.
We're just using in the nib.
So we don't have to do
anything in the code for that,
because it's automatically imported,
because the plugin loader that's
automatically generated loads it for you,
and then the nib finds it,
and then that's it.
So mixing Objective-C and
Python code is really simple.
You basically just select
the right Xcode template,
and the rest is done for you.
If you want to do that by hand,
it's really not that hard.
You can just look at the Xcode
template and see what it does,
and bring it over to another template.
There's not too much magic
involved with the plugin stuff.
Okay, PyObjC plugins.
The next demo will be a
PyInterpreter palette.
Go for it, Bob.
Okay, so in this,
in the previous example,
we had an Objective-C plugin
loaded by a Python application.
It's sitting on the desktop.
I made sure it runs in Interface Builder.
It's already built.
You can just run Interface
Builder if you wanted.
- Okay.
So what we have here is an
Interface Builder plugin written
entirely in Python with PyObjC.
And it's this nice palette
with a nice big blue thing.
And what we'll do here is we'll
create a new Cocoa application nib.
Drag over this guy.
And this is our PyInterpreterView class.
We can inspect this,
and we'll check this box to
import Objective-C classes,
and we'll test it to see if it works.
And what we have here is a
Python interpreter inside
of Interface Builder.
And we can, since we imported all these
So now this is interesting because
what this means is that you can
use Python via PyObjC to write
a plugin for any application on
Mac OS X that supports a plugin API.
So screen savers, preference panes, etc.
Well, that also includes anything like
the administrative apps that have
the plugin APIs or anything else.
So Python is obviously a wonderful
cross-platform administrative tool,
and now you can integrate it with
the GUI apps for the admin stuff,
too.
And it's great for testing,
because you can put
this right in your app,
even if it's just an Objective-C app.
You can drop this
interpreter palette in there,
and you can inspect all your
classes and call methods on things,
like I can call the
NSApplicationSharedApp.
Oh, that's interesting.
I'd be returned something else if you
do NSApplication shared application.
Yeah, sorry.
But that's my typical demo.
If I put this in something,
I'll just kill it,
because that's the only
selector on NSApplication that
I really remember very well.
And so that is a plugin
written in Python,
and that's using the same Xcode template,
just slightly modified to build a
plugin instead of an application.
And this is basically just
the PyInterpreter example
modified to be a plugin.
To build a plugin instead of
an application with py2app,
you simply specify plugin
instead of app in your setup UI.
But the setup UIs in the Xcode templates
are basically just done automatically for
you and contain a little bit of magic.
However,
if you're building a plugin instead of
an application with the Xcode template,
we currently don't
ship a plugin template.
So what you'll have to do here
is if you're building a plugin,
you go into the setup UI,
and you make some small
changes to the end.
There's a setup options, Xcode, py2app,
setup options.
You get the plugin dictionary,
and then you change that
to change the extension to palette.
And we'll have these examples
up for you later today,
and you'll be able to play with
it and look to see how it's done.
But this is all Python code.
I'm not hiding any Objective-C code here.
It's all Python stuff, no C code,
but it's loaded as a plug-in
into an Objective-C application.
So that means you can
integrate it with anything.
You can make a Colloquy plug-in,
a Quicksilver plug-in,
an Interface builder plug-in,
an Xcode plug-in, a Safari plug-in.
Like when Safari 1.3 came out,
I took this PyInterpreter thing and
I made a WebKit plug-in out of it,
which is really kind of funny because you
can have it talk to JavaScript and stuff.
Because JavaScript can talk
to Objective-C as well,
though not quite as
cleanly as Python does.
So, and speaking of the interpreter,
so this is subathedit.
subathedit is up and running.
It knows absolutely nothing about
PyObjC or Python or anything.
There's an example that's
included that injects the
interpreter into running processes.
So if I hit return now,
this is actually a Python interpreter
that's running inside of subathedit now.
So I can actually --
import the app kit,
and if I do nsapp.delegate, you'll see,
sure enough,
it came back as app controller,
which is the app delegate for subf edit.
And this does not work on Intel yet.
This barely worked on Tiger.
But it'll be there.
So that's that.
Now what's the next demo?
The code importer.
Yeah.
Okay, cool.
So we also do integration
of Python with Spotlight,
and in this case I wrote an
importer of Objective-C code,
though it's got hooks in
it for Java and Python.
Hint, hint if anyone wants to
do the parsing there.
So what the code importer does is,
this is actually a completely
different way of doing this.
This is embedding the Python interpreter
directly without using PyObjC,
and as Bob put it,
writing a whole bunch of code
you didn't have to write.
But, you know,
this is the pure Python form of it.
There's not really much of anything
terribly interesting in this.
What's interesting is
what happens when it runs.
Unless you find lots of C code doing
very hairy things with global interpreter
states and threads and all that stuff.
Unless you find lots of C code doing
very hairy things with global interpreter
states and threads and all that stuff.
If you find that interesting,
then this example would be
quite interesting to you.
Yeah.
So now that this importer is
installed and up and running,
if I go to -- where did I put it?
Here it is.
Omni Foundation.
I went and I grabbed all the Omni Group's
wonderful bodies of code and threw it
on my machine and let it chug overnight.
So now that I've done that,
I can do this.
You'll see that I'm getting
metadata about the implementations
contained in the files.
So in this case,
it's telling me the programming
language is Objective-C,
and that there's one implemented
class inside of this file.
Now, where this gets to be
interesting is I can ask some
much more difficult questions,
like, I don't know if... I guess
every Objective-C programmer's
experienced this.
I've got an NSArray,
I've linked against a
bunch of frameworks,
maybe some of them third-party.
Someone somewhere has
added a method to my class,
I don't know where the hell it is,
and I don't know what it
does or why it's there.
Let me find that implementation file.
Python doesn't natively let you do this,
by the way.
Python does not support
categories on itself.
So, this is actually a query that asks
to find all of the files on the
system that contain an implementation
of an Objective-C category
that adds methods to NSArray.
And as you can see, I mean,
this is really a Spotlight demo.
The code for the code importer
was pretty straightforward.
It's advertising the metadata,
the keys by name,
you can set up your custom queries,
you can do all that.
So, yes, we support Spotlight, too.
And then finally, one last demo, is that,
okay, we'll use this terminal
since it's so nice and big.
You can do interpretive Objective-C too.
So I can do from obc import,
from foundation import.
And so, yeah, I'm just interpreting
Objective-C at this point.
And since we can inject the interpreter,
great debugging tool, et cetera.
To drive home that this is in fact,
you know, really Objective-C and it is
really dynamic and working great,
I can do things like
NSBundle.allframeworks.
I spelled it right.
You'll see I get back an array.
It's actually an NSArray,
but because of the transparent bridging,
I can say for x in A, print x,
and you'll see it just now iterated
using the Python iteration stuff,
but obviously calling into Objective C.
Basically, what is it?
Any class that implements object
enumerator is then iterable?
- Yep.
- Yeah, so if you implement your class
with an object enumerator method,
it will be iterable in Python.
Now, I can also do some really
frightening things.
Not that we haven't done any
frightening things already.
Right.
Since everything in Python's an object,
and the bridge is just bridging
Objective-C over as a bunch of objects,
that means methods are objects too.
So sure enough,
if I do nsobject.description,
I get back the object that
represents the implementation of
the description method on nsobject.
So I can of course define a new function,
and I'm gonna make it print.
Well, description returns a string, so.
Oh, nah.
- You might wanna return
that instead of printing it.
- Oh yeah, you're right.
I really do wanna return that, don't I?
Bob keeps my stuff from crashing.
It wouldn't crash,
it just would have funny output.
So yeah, sure, I made a function.
That's great.
Now,
before we do anything mean to NSObject,
you can see that yes,
I can instantiate an NSObject,
and I get my method backs, etc.
So now, if I want to actually
override description,
I just do NSObject.description = fun.
And once that's done, it's overwritten.
Now this is actually editing
the Objective-C runtime itself,
so this will all work
from Objective-C too.
And it lets you do really frightening
things like NSArray.description equals,
I don't know, NSDictionary.description.
Oops.
Oh.
Okay.
So we broke that somewhere.
But...
If I were to put the
NSDictionary's description
into a Python function and then
throw that into the NSRate,
it'd work fine.
Well, for some definition of work, fine.
It would give you a very
interesting GDB backtrace,
I would say.
True.
Exceptions come across,
they're all transparent,
they get converted to Objective-C,
then to Python, etc.
And again, I mean,
this just isn't about macho_standalone.
The py2app stuff,
the automatic packaging stuff
just makes it so painless to
use Python on the platform.
Which, before we go to Q&A,
I'm sure one of the first questions is,
"Why isn't PyObjC shipping
in Tiger?" And the answer
there is really quite simple.
We looked at it,
and PyObjC is so painless to install.
Go grab a package, double-click it,
it works.
And the development moves rapidly.
PyObjC is constantly evolving,
it's constantly gaining new capabilities.
But it's got a ton of unit tests,
which are not only
guaranteeing the quality,
but are guaranteeing that the prior
version's contract is maintained.
And all those things together made it
such that we looked at it and we're like,
you know, people are going to be
better off just grabbing it,
double-clicking it, and running with it.
And because of py2app and the automatic
packaging tools that are there,
people that are shipping commercial
applications with this stuff,
of which there are a number,
don't have to worry about someone
grabbing some random copy and
throwing it on the ground.
Because py2app will take care of
making sure all dependencies are
resolved internally to the app wrapper.
So, you know, it was just,
it was easier to go with a
third-party solution or leave
it out there in the wild.
But in any case,
that's Python on Mac OS X.